[DRAFT] bisects DeviceCapabilityManifest into different documents (#76)
margo/specification-enhancements: proposals/sup_bisect_device_manifest.md

4. Promotes all capability data — including base compute fields — into structured `CapabilityState` documents, each posted individually to the capabilities endpoint.
5. Introduces the `CapabilityState` model inline, as the Capability Definition Framework SUP has not yet been formally introduced.

---

## Baseline

This proposal modifies the schema produced by `sup_device_roles_to_capabilities`. The current baseline after that SUP is:

```json
{
  "apiVersion": "device.margo.org/v1alpha1",
  "kind": "DeviceCapabilitiesManifest",
  "properties": {
    "id": "northstarida.xtapro.k8s.edge",
    "vendor": "Northstar Industrial Devices",
    "modelNumber": "332ANZE1-N1",
    "serialNumber": "PF45343-AA",
    "cpu": [{ "cores": 24, "architecture": "amd64" }],
    "memory": "59 Gi",
    "storage": "1862 Gi",
    "peripherals": [{ "type": "gpu", "manufacturer": "NVIDIA" }],
    "interfaces": [{ "type": "ethernet" }, { "type": "wifi" }],
    "otelCollector": true,
    "supportedRuntimes": ["oci"],
    "supportedDeploymentTypes": ["helm", "compose"]
  }
}
```

---

## Reason for Proposal

### Problem 1 — Identity and capabilities are coupled in a single document

> Identity fields (`id`, `vendor`, `modelNumber`, `serialNumber`) never change after onboarding. Capability fields change frequently — whenever workloads are deployed, hardware is added, or runtime configuration changes. Sending both together means:

Reviewer: >Capability fields change frequently

Based on the current specification, I would say this is overstated. While I agree that some things might change occasionally (especially if it's a virtual device), it's not like these things will be changing weekly or probably even monthly.

Maybe this statement is projecting your changes on top of it. So, if you intended to use the device capabilities to report current allocations, then this would require it to be sent more frequently, but that's because of a change being proposed and not because of how it's currently defined.

Author: @phil-abb  I see what you mean now. If cpu and memory only mean "total hardware capacity," then yes, they won't change often.

But from a practical standpoint, just knowing the total capacity doesn't help much unless we talk about what resources are free or occupied. I was operating under the assumption that resource fields should reflect real-time or frequent updates whenever the device sees a state change.

Since this requirement will vary heavily from vendor to vendor, decoupling the documents gives us the flexibility to support those dynamic allocation reports use case as well.

Reviewer: No, that's the point of having the [observability stuff](https://docs.margo.org/specification/observability/collecting-workload-observability-data). It reports the current usage for these [typical resources](https://docs.margo.org/specification/observability/collecting-workload-observability-data#workload-observability-default-telemetry)

Author: But if the WFM needs to make an orchestration decision based on whether a GPU is occupied on a device, will observability data really help there?

Observability metrics show real-time resource utilization, but they don't show logical assignments. If a workload is currently idling, metrics might show 0% usage, but the resource is still technically claimed. I am coming from the standpoint that WFMs should be enabled to see these allocation states to make accurate scheduling decisions, **if they want to**.

Author: I think I missed a key point on how this works under the hood: `CapabilityState` tracks the logical assignment of a resource, along-with metrics.

Reviewer: No, the observability data will not show everything. The list of what metrics are expected to be there by default is listed at the bottom of the page: https://docs.margo.org/specification/observability/collecting-workload-observability-data#workload-observability-default-telemetry

There is a difference between indicating if something allocatable is allocated versus showing usage metrics. I agree it probably makes sense to use this API to inform on what is allocated and allocatable, but I don't think it makes sense to try to use it to communicate those real-time usage metrics.

> 

Reviewer: I understand the point that it doesn't make sense to keep sending information that is static every time something unrelated changes, but there's much information being sent with these four fields (granted, more might be added in the future). 

I agree this information is not related to capabilities, but that doesn't mean seperate documents would need to be created. We could just as easily change the name and structure of this document to indicate it is a collection of device information and not only "capabilities," as the current name suggests.

Author: I agree that they could technically live under the same document.

However, to me, the completely separate documents provide a much better separation of concerns and are cleaner to understand than putting everything under a single object. It will prevent the two scopes from bleeding into each other as the spec grows.

**Gateway hierarchy:** The `{deviceId}` path hierarchy encoding (e.g. `gateway1/deviceA`) is retained unchanged on both endpoint groups.

---

### Response Codes

| Code | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `201 Created` | Document was added successfully. |
| `200 OK` | Document was updated successfully. |
| `204 No Content` | Document was deleted successfully. |
| `400 Bad Request` | Missing or invalid `content-digest` header, or malformed request body. |
| `401 Unauthorized` | Signature verification failed. |
| `403 Forbidden` | Client certificate is not trusted or has been revoked. |
| `404 Not Found` | No client with the given `clientId` found, or no `DeviceManifest` registered for the given `deviceId` (capabilities endpoint only). |
| `422 Unprocessable Content` | Request body includes a semantic error. |

---

### DeviceManifest

Carries device identity only. Sent once at onboarding. Updated only if identity information changes.

**Endpoint:** `POST /api/v1/clients/{clientId}/devices/{deviceId}`

**Example:**

> ```json

Reviewer: Same thing, based on the discussions over "kind" and "apiVersion", can't we remove them from the payload?

Also, is there a reason to have the "properties" subgrouping? Is there something other than "properties" that is planned to be added?

  "properties": {
    "id": "northstarida.xtapro.k8s.edge",
    "vendor": "Northstar Industrial Devices",
    "modelNumber": "332ANZE1-N1",
    "serialNumber": "PF45343-AA"
  }
}
```

**Fields:**

| Field | Type | Required | Description |
|-------|------|----------|-------------|
| `apiVersion` | string | Y | Must be `margo.org/v1`. |
| `kind` | string | Y | Must be `DeviceManifest`. |
| `properties.id` | string | Y | Unique device identifier. Must include only unreserved characters as specified in RFC3986 plus the path separator `/`. |
| `properties.vendor` | string | Y | Device vendor name. |
| `properties.modelNumber` | string | Y | Device model number. |
| `properties.serialNumber` | string | Y | Device serial number. |

---

### CapabilityState

Each capability is submitted as an individual `CapabilityState` document. There is no wrapping manifest — the `CapabilityState` is the document.

**Endpoint:** `POST /api/v1/clients/{clientId}/devices/{deviceId}/capabilities`

The WFM uses `metadata.id` to identify which capability is being registered or updated. Submitting a `CapabilityState` for a `capability` URI that already exists for the device replaces the previous state.

> **Document structure:**

Reviewer: Is there a reason not to make this an array instead of requiring a bunch of individual API calls? Based on the proposal, this will result in a lot of chattiness, primarily during the initial onboarding, where all these capabilities are sent to the WFM.  Would it make sense instead for this to be an array so all the capabilities that need to be sent could be sent at the same time?

Author: Yeah, this will be helpful. Will update the proposal. Thanks!

> ```json

Reviewer: Based on the other discussions we've been having about "apiVersion and "kind", do we need these here? Also, I don't know that including the "metadata" section is needed. Could it just be:

```json
{
  "id": "<capability-uri>"
  "spec": {
    // capability-specific state object
  }
}
```

Author: I'll update it tomorrow. Thanks!

Author: I have updated the SUP content.

{
  "apiVersion": "margo.org/v1",
  "kind": "CapabilityState",
  "metadata": {
    "id": "<capability-uri>"
  },
  "spec": {
    // capability-specific state object
  }
}
```

**Fields:**

| Field | Type | Required | Description |
|-------|------|----------|-------------|
| `apiVersion` | string | Y | Must be `margo.org/v1`. |
| `kind` | string | Y | Must be `CapabilityState`. |
| `metadata.id` | string | Y | URI identifying the capability type. Determines the schema of `spec`. |
| `spec` | object | Y | Runtime state for this capability. Content is governed by the schema for the referenced capability URI. |

**DELETE — removing a capability:**

To remove a capability from a device (e.g. hardware was physically removed), send a DELETE request with the capability URI in the request body:

```
DELETE /api/v1/clients/{clientId}/devices/{deviceId}/capabilities
```

```json
{
  "id": "capability.margo.org/hardware/gpu"
}
```

The WFM MUST remove the stored `CapabilityState` for the given `capability` URI on the given device.

---

### Capability URI Namespace

Capability URIs follow a reverse-DNS convention:

| Namespace | Owner | Example |
|-----------|-------|---------|

> | `capability.margo.org/*` | Margo specification — standardised capabilities | `capability.margo.org/hardware/gpu` |

Reviewer: A repeat of a previous comment (see https://github.com/margo/specification-enhancements/pull/66#issuecomment-4632472032), but a GPU is not a capability. GPUs enable certain capabilities, but it's not a capability. 

GPU is just an example, but I think we have been mixing the terms from the beginning. We're calling the "thing" the capability instead of the functionality that the "thing" allows for.

Reviewer: This doesn't mean we cannot use the "thing" as part of the ID, but in the cases we do, we shouldn't call it a capability. We don't have to keep using "capability" just because we used it originally if there is a better term to use.

Author: Actually, this proposal expands the definition of a `Capability`, [check this](https://github.com/margo/specification-enhancements/pull/76/files#diff-5c5601aef2849436e9b6e2d61a1032fac4799d014852a7e501fc70f426ea6789R86) . 
and as per it a GPU is a platform-concern, and is considered as a hardware capability.

Btw, I actually heavily considered introducing a broader term like `PlatformConcern` or `PlatformFeature` or `Resource` to address wider range of these things available on a system. But I chose to extend the existing `Capability` terminology to keep the conceptual surface area small for us.

Reviewer: I think I would prefer an overarching term such as DeviceProfile instead of DeviceCapabilities, and then the DeviceProfile can have things like Resource (CPU, Memory, Storage), Interfaces (Ethernet, WiFi, USB), Peripherals (GPU, Camera, Microphone), and Capabilities (Video encoding, AI acceleration). 

For example, the endpoint would be `/api/v1/clients/{clientId}/devices/{deviceId}/profile` and IDs could be:
- deviceprofile.margo.org/resource/cpu
- deviceprofile.margo.org/resource/memory
- deviceprofile.margo.org/resource/storage
- deviceprofile.margo.org/capability/observability
- deviceprofile.margo.org/capability/runtimes
- deviceprofile.margo.org/peripherals/gpu
- deviceprofile.margo.org/interface/ethernet
- deviceprofile.margo.org/interface/canbus

Author: I liked the idea of a device profile. I have updated the SUP content and introduced the concept of a DeviceProfile, can you please take some time to review again? Thanks!

Reviewer: @singhmj-1 - I should have some time on Friday to review the latest changes 👍

Reviewer: @singhmj-1 - I like the latest updates a lot. I like how this idea is coming together. 

I'd be interested in hearing what other @margo/technical-wg members think of it.

| `capability.<vendor-domain>/*` | Vendor-defined capabilities | `capability.acme.com/fieldbus/profinet` |

The WFM MUST accept any well-formed URI in `metadata.id`. It MUST validate `spec` content against the schema for the referenced URI if a schema is registered. If no schema is registered for the URI, the WFM MUST store the `spec` as-is without validation.

---

### Standard Capability URIs Introduced by This SUP

> The following capability URIs replace the flat fields from the baseline schema. All are under the `capability.margo.org` namespace.

Reviewer: I believe this SUP is proposing that the following become official Margo definitions. If this is the case, we should probably define the parameters for each of them. The data types, required/optional, acceptable values, description, etc., as part of this SUP

  "kind": "CapabilityState",
  "metadata": {
    "id": "capability.margo.org/hardware/gpu"
  },
  "spec": {
    "gpus": [
      {
        "devicePath": "/dev/nvidia0",
        "model": "NVIDIA A100",
        "architecture": "ampere",
        "vramGiB": 40,
        "allocatedTo": ""
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

#### `capability.margo.org/interface/ethernet`

Replaces `interfaces` entries of type `ethernet` and `wifi`.

```json
{
  "apiVersion": "margo.org/v1",
  "kind": "CapabilityState",
  "metadata": {
    "id": "capability.margo.org/interface/ethernet"
  },
  "spec": {
    "interfaces": [
      { "name": "eth0", "speed": "1Gbps" },
      { "name": "wlan0", "speed": "300Mbps" }
    ]
  }
}
```

#### Vendor-defined example — `capability.acme.com/fieldbus/canbus`

Vendor-defined capabilities follow the same structure. The WFM stores the `spec` as-is if no schema is registered for the URI.

```json
{
  "apiVersion": "margo.org/v1",
  "kind": "CapabilityState",
  "metadata": {
    "id": "capability.acme.com/fieldbus/canbus"
  },
  "spec": {
    "channels": [
      {
        "channelId": "can0",
        "baudRate": 500000,
        "protocol": "CANopen",
        "allocated": false,

>         "allocatedBy": ""

Reviewer: I commented on the need to define the parameters for these types above, so I'm not sure what the allowed properties would be, but I think the "allocated" and "allocatedBy" properties duplicate information. I don't think the "allocated" is needed because this will always be false when "allocatedBy" is empty (or not sent), and always true when "allocatedBy" is set.

---

## Baseline

This proposal replaces the old schema format created by `sup_device_roles_to_capabilities`. In that all device identity and resource data were crammed into one single object called the DeviceCapabilitiesManifest.

The Old Format:
```json
{
  "apiVersion": "device.margo.org/v1alpha1",
  "kind": "DeviceCapabilitiesManifest",
  "properties": {
    "id": "northstarida.xtapro.k8s.edge",
    "vendor": "Northstar Industrial Devices",
    "modelNumber": "332ANZE1-N1",
    "serialNumber": "PF45343-AA",
    "cpu": [{ "cores": 24, "architecture": "amd64" }],
    "memory": "59 Gi",
    "storage": "1862 Gi",
    "peripherals": [{ "type": "gpu", "manufacturer": "NVIDIA" }],
    "interfaces": [{ "type": "ethernet" }, { "type": "wifi" }],
    "otelCollector": true,
    "supportedRuntimes": ["oci"],
    "supportedDeploymentTypes": ["helm", "compose"]
  }
}
```

This proposal completely eliminates this combined format and rebuilds the way features are reported from scratch.

---

## Reason for Proposal

### Problem 1: Identity and resources are mixed together

> Identity data rarel changes. Resource related data changes often. Sending them together creates major issues: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Identity data rarely changes. Resource related data changes often. Sending them together creates major issues: 
```

* Wasted data: Resource updates force you to resend unchanged identity details.
* Confusion: The system cannot separate a serial number fix from a hardware change.
* No independent updates: You cannot version or evolve identity fields and resource fields separately.

### Problem 2: Limited descriptions for hardware and networks
The current setup uses basic labels that cannot share real-world details, as of now:

* A graphics card (GPU) lists only type and manufacturer. It doesn't show its VRAM size, system path, or architecture etc.
* A network connection (like CAN Bus) has only a type field. It doesn't show its speed, protocol, or channel ID etc.

> The point to make here is that there would be requirement for a much complexer data structure for different resources and capabilities provided by platforms. It would be better to detach give them their dedicated documents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The point to make here is that there would be requirements for a much more complex data structure for the different resources and capabilities provided by platforms. It would be better to detach them to give each their dedicated documents.
```

Standard fields like cpu, memory, and storage are treated as rigid, flat text blocks. You cannot expand their structure easily. They need to become standalone profile files with their own flexible rulebooks.

### Problem 4: Hardware types are hardcoded
Adding a new piece of hardware (like an AI accelerator or secure chip) forces a complete update to the core system specification. This creates a bottleneck. Device makers cannot launch new features until the main community updates the global rules.

---

## Introducing the Profile Framework

A Profile is a specific resource, service, capability or settings on a device/wfm (like a GPU, local storage, vault service). To keep data organized, every Profile is split into two parts: its rules (ProfileDefinition) and its actual live data (ProfileState).

```
ProfileDefinition  →  defines the contract (schema, scope, ownership, category)
ProfileState       →  runtime data conforming to that contract
```

Devices send out many `ProfileState` documents after onboarding and update them when there are changes. Every `ProfileState` must conform to the rules written in its matching `ProfileDefinition` blueprint.

---

> ### ProfileDefinition

Reviewer: It might be helpful to come up with a starting list of guiding principles for these profile definitions. 

For example, I think it should be a goal to try to keep the required properties to the absolute minimum needed to enable basic interoperability.

It would be good to make it easy to meet the standard use case, but be flexible enough to allow advanced use cases to be met. I'm thinking of the real-time workload use case here. We don't want to require devices with no intention of supporting real-time workloads to have to provide additional unnecessary details just because we want to support real-time workloads.

Reviewer 2: > It would be good to make it easy to meet the standard use case, but be flexible enough to allow advanced use cases to be met. I'm thinking of the real-time workload use case here. We don't want to require devices with no intention of supporting real-time workloads to have to provide additional unnecessary details just because we want to support real-time workloads.

I agree, it would mean that we have a "default" set of  `ProfileDefinition` already specified in the examples, to start with with scope for the community to improve further.
We may need to set the ground-rules of how this flexibility is exercised - 
- Margo specifies a default set of `ProfileDefinition`
- Vendors may add more to these definitions, but they need to register these `ProfileDefinition` with the WFM, hence giving the vocabulary for  resources and their interpretation.
- The `ProfileDefinition` is used to implement (create and parse) the `ProfileState`, without using any hard-coded knowledge, by the WFM and WFM Client. The vendors (WFM and Device) need to be adopt the flexible schema specified as the `ProfileDefinition`

```
# Device identity
POST   /api/v1/clients/{clientId}/devices/{deviceId}
PUT    /api/v1/clients/{clientId}/devices/{deviceId}
DELETE /api/v1/clients/{clientId}/devices/{deviceId}

# Device profile state
POST   /api/v1/clients/{clientId}/devices/{deviceId}/profiles
PUT    /api/v1/clients/{clientId}/devices/{deviceId}/profiles
DELETE /api/v1/clients/{clientId}/devices/{deviceId}/profiles
```

**Ordering requirement:** `DeviceManifest` MUST be registered before any `ProfileState` can be submitted for the same `deviceId`. If the WFM receives a `ProfileState` for an unknown `deviceId`, it MUST reject with `404 Not Found`.

**Scope enforcement:** The WFM MUST verify that the submitting client matches the `scope` declared in the referenced `ProfileDefinition`:
- Violations MUST be rejected with `403 Forbidden`.

**Update granularity — bulk operations:**

Each POST or PUT to the profile endpoint carries an array of `ProfileState` documents in a single request:

```json
[
  {
    "profileDefinitionId": "deviceprofile.margo.org/resource/cpu",
    "platformState": { }
  },
  {
    "profileDefinitionId": "deviceprofile.margo.org/peripherals/gpu",
    "platformState": { }
  }
]
```

> The WFM processes all items atomically: either all succeed or all fail. When it fails, the WFM MUST return a `422 Unprocessable Content` response identifying which `profileDefinitionId` caused the failure:

Reviewer: We probably want to think about how to incorporate the proposed changes to use RFC 9457: https://github.com/margo/specification-enhancements/pull/73

 There's a good chance this SUP will get approved. We can probably wait until the voting, but it might be good to start thinking about it.

        "type": "array",
        "minItems": 1,
        "items": {
          "type": "object",
          "required": ["channelId"],
          "properties": {
            "channelId": { "type": "string", "description": "CAN channel identifier (e.g. can0)" },
            "baudRate": { "type": "integer", "description": "Baud rate in bits per second (e.g. 500000)" },
            "protocol": { "type": "string", "enum": ["CAN2.0A", "CAN2.0B", "CANFD"], "description": "CAN protocol variant" }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

**ProfileState Example:**

```json
{
  "profileDefinitionId": "deviceprofile.example.org/interface/canbus",
  "platformState": {
    "interfaces": [
      { "channelId": "can0", "baudRate": 500000, "protocol": "CAN2.0B" }
    ]
  }
}
```

---

#### `deviceprofile.margo.org/service/otel-collector`

**ProfileDefinition:**

```json
{
  "profileDefinitionId": "deviceprofile.margo.org/service/otel-collector",
  "description": "Profile Definition for the OpenTelemetry collector service",
  "scope": "device",
  "category": "service",
  "schemaVersion": "1.0.0",
  "platformStateSchema": {
    "type": "object",
    "required": ["endpoint"],
    "properties": {

>       "endpoint": {

Reviewer: I'm not sure what information makes sense to send for the otel collector other than an indication of it being available. There's really nothing the WFM can do with the endpoint, so I don't think it's helpful to send.

Reviewer: Maybe we can start with a simple boolean and think about it afterwards if this gets approved. The only thing I can think of right now that might be useful is client certificate information for enabling mTLS, but I don't know if we'd want to use this for that.

        "type": "string",
        "description": "The OTEL collector service endpoints"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

**ProfileState Example:**

```json
{
  "profileDefinitionId": "deviceprofile.margo.org/service/otel-collector",
  "platformState": { "endpoint": "http://localhost:4317" }
}
```

---

#### `deviceprofile.margo.org/capability/runtimes`

**ProfileDefinition:**

```json
{
  "profileDefinitionId": "deviceprofile.margo.org/capability/runtimes",
  "description": "Profile Definition for supported container runtimes and deployment types",
  "scope": "device",
  "category": "capability",
  "schemaVersion": "1.0.0",
  "platformStateSchema": {
    "type": "object",
    "required": ["containerRuntimes", "deploymentTypes"],
    "properties": {
      "containerRuntimes": {
        "type": "array",
        "minItems": 1,

>         "items": { "type": "string" },

Reviewer: This should be an enum with just "oci" for now.

        "description": "List of supported container runtime standards (e.g. oci)"
      },
      "deploymentTypes": {
        "type": "array",
        "minItems": 1,

>         "items": { "type": "string" },

Reviewer: This should be an enum with just "helm" and "compose" for now. Depending on the voting results for the custom runtime support, "custom" might be added.
